# Basics

# CPU Architecture

A CPU works by retrieving 2 binary numbers from the memory unit and adding them using the Arithmetic/Logic Unit. These 2 numbers must be the same in bit length for the operation to succeed.

# Data Types

## Two’s Complement

Two’s complement is a method of storing integers so negative numbers may be represented.

First you take the one’s complement of the number by flipping the bits. Then 1 is added to that number so that their sum will equal 0 (the carry over bit is discarded). That new number is the negative of the first.

## Primitive Data Types

Java has 4 categories of primitive data types:

- Integer
- Floating Points
- Character
- Boolean

### Integers

An `int` is stored as 32 bits with two’s complement, giving it a range from

Integers are stored as a string of bits, following two’s complement notation. One bit, usually the first, will be the sign bit, indicating a positive or negative numbers. This is why the maximum and minimum values of integral types generally follow the equation $2^{size-1}$ , as the first bit is reserved for the sign. The range of these integral types are $-2^{size-1}$ to $2^{size-1} - 1$. The minimum value is one smaller because it does not have to store $-0$.

| Sign Bit | Bit | Bit | Bit | Bit | Bit | Bit | Bit |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 0 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 |

### Floats and Doubles

The storage of floating points numbers are far more complex. Doubles follow the IEEE 754 64 bit floating point specification, which stores floating point numbers with the representation below. Floats are not included in the AP Java subset.

$$
sign * mantissa * 2^{exponent}
$$

Typically, for a 64 bit floating point number, 11 bits are allocated to the exponent, 52 to the mantissa, and one for the sign. 

Illegal operations can result in a `NaN` — Not a Number — and operations that create huge numbers will result in an `Infinity`.

<aside>
💡 Floats have 1 sign bit, 8 exponent bits, 23 mantissa bits
Doubles have 1 sign bit, 11 exponent bits, and 52 mantissa bits

</aside>

Comparing 2 different floating points should not be done. Storing a potentially infinitely floating point number in a fixed amount of bits will lead to some data loss (i.e. rounding). 

## Characters

Characters are stored as unsigned 16 bits which map to ASCII characters.

## Booleans

Booleans can be represented in a bit but are instead stored in a byte, as the CPU cannot address an individual bit

# Operators

- Compound operators will implicitly cast the result
    
    ```java
    T a;
    a += b;
    
    // expands to
    
    a = (T) (a + b);
    ```
    

# Input Streams

- All data sent over streams are serial; a series of bytes
- The default input stream is mapped to the keyboard input
    - A scanner allows you to read from this stream

# Packages

- Java uses a recursive package system (similar to a file structure)
- Java uses dots as delimiters between package names
- The `java.lang` package does not to be imported

# Random

- Random numbers are generated with an iterative formula which are seeded with the hardware time

# Boolean Conditions

- $A \texttt{ and } B = \overline{\bar{A} \texttt{ or } \bar{B}}$
- $A \texttt{ or } B = \overline{\bar{A} \texttt{ and } \bar{B}}$

# String Interning

String literals are interned (cached) and will reuse literals with the name value.

Therefore, this code will output `true`:

```java
String s1 = "Hello";
String s2 = "Hello";

System.out.println(s1 == s2);
```

…and the below code will output `false`:

```java
String s1 = new String("Hello");
String s2 = new String("Hello");

System.out.println(s1 == s2);
```

# Methods

- Use methods to
    - Break problems into smaller ones
    - Allow code to be reused
    - Allow for easy refactors later
- Methods should be short and responsible for one task.

# OOP

## Static Variables

- Variable `ClassName.VariableName` is stored on the **stack**, not the **heap.**
- Usually constants applicable to all instances

## Constructors

- You have multiple constructors (via method overloading)
    - If you have no constructors, a default one that calls `super()` will be implicitly inserted by the constructor.
- Constructors can have any code you want but the convention is to initialize/constructing the object.

## References

- A variable which holds an object holds a reference to an object on the heap.
- Using the dot operator will follow the reference to its value.
- Assigning a reference to another will copy the reference of the first reference to the second reference
    - A copy occurs because references kind act like primitives in that way.

```java
obj1 = obj2; // obj1 and obj2 will point to the same object
```

- If an object on the heap is not referenced anymore, it will be garbage collected.

## Object Interactions

- A class’s method that takes a parameter of type of the class is usually named `other` by convention.

[Basics (1)](Basics%207a0413d409934a2685324bf56433d5e8/Basics%20(1)%20704bc059ddfd426c8f822294bd8f86df.md)